hey everyone how's it goin Lazlo
Montgomery here starting to wind things
down on this epic history of T overview
part 9 today only one more after this I
assure you
oh man Chyna hit such a good run 27:37
BCE all the way to 1850 four thousand
five hundred and eighty-seven years
that's a nice stretch by anyone's
reckoning shoot Standard Oil only had
their monopoly for not even 40 years
it's really amazing that with tea
growing in many other places besides
China after so long no one except the
Chinese had figured out how to turn
those leaves into teas that were so
tasty they inspired a million poems
paintings and countless literary and
artistic works the Koreans and Japanese
of course had their great contributions
to tea culture but it's pretty well
known from whom they originally drew
their earliest inspiration in the last
episode I introduced mr. Robert fortune
a botanist who lived very charmed and
adventurous life he had taken on this
very dangerous and life-threatening
assignment from the EIC that as I said
quoting Sarah rose in her book amounted
to international espionage now Lou over
at the wonderful tea resource babble
carp calm the tea lexicon and probably
many others besides Lou believe Robert
fortune didn't commit industrial
espionage as much as he acted as a
nineteenth-century open-source pioneer
that's for all y'alls to decide there
were multiple ways to look at what
Robert fortune did on his first two
china trips we left off last time in
part eight with Fortune halfway home
before he could breathe easy and say the
magic words mission accomplished since
the ultimate objective was to transplant
all the goodness of Chinese tea into
Indian soil get everything on board the
vessel at the China port was only half
the battle they still had to get
all the seeds seedlings and saplings to
their final destination alive across the
waves in the dead of winter and up into
the mountains for this voyage packed on
board were thirteen thousand young
plants and five gallons of seeds the
contents were divided up amongst four
vessels and this way if one or two ships
went down to Davy Jones locker there
were still backups fortunately when as
far as Hong Kong once again the Wardian
cases invented tested and proven
effective in the field by fortune were
the unsung heroes of that momentous 19th
century saga dr. Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward
quite an impact on the world he ended up
having with his bursts of creativity and
innovation fortunate managed to pick a
first-rate crew of gardeners to babysit
everything and ensure the integrity of
the cases from port to port one had to
be very careful because once you opened
up the ward case or a crack appeared it
was over for the contents when you
sealed it shut the whole system inside
the ward case maintained itself fortune
had done his job well for the company
now it was time for him to kick back and
let his counterparts in India take over
the operation if fortune was the perfect
man for the undercover job in China Hugh
Falconer was the best man for all that
needed to follow in India he was a
Scotsman like fortune who already
enjoyed some fame and repute as an
accomplished paleontologist geologist
and botanist Falconer had already been
in the tea business in India since 1830
for he had been chosen by the British
officials in that part of India to
spearhead the development of tea
plantations in India that could compete
with and later supplant all Chinese tea
imports he had left India for many years
but found himself back in the employ of
the government managing the tea
operation that fortune was participating
in his role was to be on the receiving
end of the cargo and to manage the
transport of the China
t-too its first destination the siharan
poor experimental gardens and Uttar
Pradesh
that was a good 1,500 kilometers from
the mountains of Assam to the east in
between Bangladesh and Myanmar just
south of Bhutan as the tea
made its way up the mountains to its
final destination but if a disaster
occurred when some nitwit official went
and opened up the ward cases to take a
look inside
but whatever calamity like this big or
small that the group encountered as they
made their way to Sahar on poor they got
through it by improvising once they
arrived at the experimental garden
station they were met by deputy Surgeon
General William Jameson he was serving
in his early years of a long stint at
the garden that would last till 1875 of
the 13 thousand seedlings of green tea
bush a thousand were still alive but by
the time they reached their destination
only 3% of what left China was still
viable
so although everything made it on board
the vessel okay in the end they learned
from this green tea mission that the
transport methods were equally as
important as the procurement in
retrospect Jameson ended up being the
weak link in the chain of key players
Falconer blamed the failure of the
mission on Jameson and Jameson pointed
his finger at Falconer it was a huge
disappointment and somewhat of a setback
fortune had gone to a lot of trouble in
on kwai and Joe Jung to procure these
seeds and plants bear in mind when this
was happening in 1850 all the tea
developed in India had been green tea
black tea is still not quite yet a
reality in India and I'm sure you all
know this but milk and sugar doesn't go
with green tea can only mix as well with
black tea so getting that black tea
process just right was important to the
tea planters in India working in the
employ of the British authorities
it sure was going to be important to the
people in the sugar business in the West
these their product was destined to
sweeten the tea and dozens of millions
of tea cups the world over the scandal
of the Prussian blue and gypsum being
added to green tea as food coloring
caused a seismic shift in the popular
tastes for an alternative brew the first
World's Fair the 1851 Great Exhibition
held in Crystal Palace turned out to be
the perfect venue to announce the matter
of these toxic additives being
maliciously mixed in with China green
tea with the introduction of this deadly
food scandal into the public discourse
it had predictable results it caused the
British public to more quickly accept
this new Indian black tea over all they
had known since they were born black tea
was standing in the wings when green tea
got that bad rap and when China tea got
a bad name the Indian tea industry was
just getting ready to stand up for the
first time fortune received word about
the setback in the green tea mission
while he was still in China now this
black tea mission with the best he could
get his hands on in the Louie Mountain
area was even more important and its
success was critical a newer and more
reliable transport method and to be
figured out fortune did things different
this time around when it came time to
ship this new lot of tea he came up with
a brainy idea to ship the seize already
planted in the soil inside the ward
cases this turned out to be the simple
solution to the vexing problem by the
time this vessel arrived in Calcutta the
tea seeds packed from the four foot by
six foot glass cases had all germinated
that is to say of the 20,000 China tea
seedlings packed by fortune twelve
thousand eight hundred and thirty eight
had survived the trip sprouted and were
beginning to grow fortune tried this
transport method again sending another
shipment of planted seeds everything
arrived in perfect shape
this new method thought up by fortune
was not only more effective
and shipping actual plants it was also
much easier to execute now they had to
get them into the Indian soil and
launched a multi-billion dollar industry
to do this fortune used his relationship
with the traders Denton company to
procure the employment services of eight
China tea experts these eight Chinese
signed a three-year deal to stay in
India and show the plantation workers
and management everything there was to
know about how they did it back in
fuu-chin quoting from Sarah Rose's book
for all the tea in China the contract
these eight men signed went like this
quote I whoever a Chinese tea maker
hereby engaged to proceed to the
Himalayan gardens to manufacture tea in
the government tea plantations on a
monthly salary of fifteen dollars or
thirty three rupees commencing from
such-and-such a date and I bind myself
to serve for a period of three years I
further engage that I will work
diligently as a tea cultivator or in any
manner in which I can be useful and
failing any part of the engagement I
shall be liable to pay a fine of 100
dollars to my employers I acknowledge
having received from mr. fortune and the
part of the government in advance of two
months wages or $30 end quote
they left Shanghai in 1851 and sailed
the route that took them to India so not
only had fortune risked his life to
steal the tea seeds and plants he
managed to walk out of eastern China
with the processing technology as well
and as if this weren't enough he also
figured out how to safely and
successfully transport the fragile cargo
then for zhan car Robert fortune managed
to rustle up eight tea experts from
China who are willing to sell out their
country by transferring this technology
to the British in India and last I
checked the Indian government never sent
any royalty checks to Beijing when the
Chinese tea experts arrived at the
location in northern India they brought
in addition to the knowledge stored in
their brains all the necessary equipment
to process the tea ovens walks and
cultivation tool
they are they bred and crossbred all the
seeds and plants that fortune brought
from China with the local Indian tea
plants then through the next several
generations utilizing all the selective
breeding techniques learned over time
they gradually got it all right Gregor
Mendel was laying the groundwork for
modern genetics around this time mid to
late 1860's it was a very exciting time
in plant genetics the great minds
working on this mini manhattan project
figured it all out and were able to take
full advantage of the topography climate
and soil of the bengal region into the
1850s and 1860s the combined efforts of
everyone involved got it all up and
running today in 2015 of the 4 billion
or so kilos of tea production in the
world India now produces 1/4 of that
Assam state in India today is the
largest single tea growing region in the
whole world
fresh on the heels of their success in
Assam another new tea town was planned
in Darjeeling 7,000 feet above sea level
the Darjeeling operation was seeded with
tea seedlings developed at the
Experimental Station still going strong
in siharan pour the man in charge in
Darjeeling was Archibald Campbell
Campbell as an experiment had early on
planted seeds in Darjeeling that showed
a great deal of promise this is what led
him to higher-ups in authority who took
an interest in his early results in
March 1851 fortune arrived in India to
finally see firsthand what was going on
with the tea enterprise that he would
later be called the father of he went to
saharanpur first and saw a thriving
operation he got on famously with
Campbell who would be credited together
with fortune for the unparalleled
success of the operation everything
fortune brought back was carefully
planted even 80 of the plants considered
beyond saving that came from the first
green tea shipment
made a miraculous recovery despite the
hardships and missteps along the way
this operation was by all accounts a
great success seeds originally brought
back from the Wu amount area were
planted in Darjeeling and this formed
the earliest base stock of Darjeeling
tea the earliest plants experimented on
by Campbell had not worked as well and
the flavors were not quite up to par but
in a single generation after planting
the seeds fortune brought from Fujian
province the Indian tea industry had
grown from a seed to become the world
leader in production volume exports and
in pricing as well and not only that in
the European and American markets the
Indian tea soon bested the competitive
product from China and although this was
a subjective matter the tea tasters
working for the British firms considered
the black tea from India to be superior
and taste as well today Darjeeling tea
is called the champagne of teas
Darjeeling is a place as famous for a
black tea but you'll see in recent years
growers in West Bengal are also giving
the Chinese a run for their money with
their green white and long teas
Darjeeling tea although it's called
black tea is technically an oolong
because the oxidation of the leaf isn't
a hundred percent like in other blacks
after China lost all that business they
never got it back in 1879 over seventy
percent of the tea sold in England still
came from China by 1900 this share was
down at ten percent and falling the way
global demand had grown in the mid to
late 1800s and it become too
overwhelming for China's supply chain
China's tea manufacturing industry as
big as it was was very fragmented
supplied by an intricate network of
small-time operations run by temples
individual tea farmers and families it
was terribly inefficient for the kind of
demand that needed to be ramped up to
satisfy the rapidly growing nineteenth
and twentieth century global
markets the way the British said
everything up in India the whole
operation was geared towards the most
efficient mass production methods
possible I didn't mention Sri Lanka yet
because I felt the strongest
gravitational force imaginable and
feared getting carried away with the
story of the tea industry there let me
just touch on Sri Lanka or salon as it
was called back in the day not many
people know this but it was James Taylor
who launched the whole tea industry
they're not sweet baby James a different
James Taylor another Scotsman of course
man those guys are everywhere
he arrived in Ceylon in 1852 and worked
with another Scotsman of Irish parentage
who I'm sure you all heard of Thomas
Johnstone Lipton of the lipton tea
company Lipton started his business in
Scotland in Glasgow
he started with one shop selling hams
sides of bacon eggs you know one of
these kinds of old-time stores that
first shop located on stop cross street
in Glasgow led to several more and
before long his Lipton markets were
found in England and Ireland as well in
1889 when Thomas J Lipton got into the
tea business he imported twenty thousand
chests of tea and the PT Barnum and
Thomas Lipton created this public
spectacle when the tea arrived at Port
he hired a brass band and paraded the
tea through the streets of Glasgow
Lipton's company grabbed their initial
chunk of market share by aggressively
undercutting the competition on price
for May to October 1893 the World's
Columbian Exposition aka the Chicago
World's Fair was held good thing that
didn't hold it in the winter the fear
was held on six hundred and thirty acres
and what is today the Jackson Park
Midway Hyde Park and the Woodlawn
neighborhoods of Chicago 27 million
people walked through the grounds and it
was at this venue the Chicago World's
Fair of 1893 that Lipton tea was
introduced to the American public I
guess you could say the American ski
he's dug this tea that's pretty much all
I ever knew growing up they set up a
company in New York that later moved to
Hoboken birthplace of Frank Sinatra the
Lipton tea brand is owned since 1971 by
the anglo-dutch giant Unilever Thomas
Lipton defined the word workaholic he
had a sign that he hung on his wall that
said quote there was no fun like work
you know he never married it would joke
when people would ask him why he the
great multi-millionaire tea tycoon had
never gotten hitched Lipton would reply
quote oh the price of tea was far too
low to keep a wife end quote
by 1898 Lipton's company went public and
the recent Alibaba IPO was just a modern
day version of the Lipton IPO back of
the day he only tried to raise two
million pounds but the share offering
was 25 times oversubscribed Lipton was
knighted by Queen Victoria that same
year man he was riding high Lipton by
the way was the original in a line of
famous tycoons who financed yachts in
the America's Cup this oldest of all
international sporting trophies he
bankrolled yachts in the 1899 1901 1903
1914 and 1929 America's Cup Lipton's
team never won but he was always
particularly admired by the Yanks
because of his excellent displays of
good sportsmanship these appearances in
the America's Cup gave the Lipton brand
a huge rocket boost during those decades
Alan Bond Sir Michael Fay Bill Koch and
Larry Ellison all followed and Lipton's
footsteps and using their financial
might to win this coveted trophy looked
in and James Taylor met in 1890 with
Lipton's money and management know-how
and Taylor's success in growing tea in
the highlands of salon this island began
to join its neighbor India as a major
world grower of quality black teas the
first seeds to be planted in Ceylon came
from the tea plants from Assam the
indigenous Four
variety of Camellia sinensis the british
built the tea industry in sri lanka very
much as they did in india that's another
great history and has spawned all kinds
of stories and interesting people the
British did the same thing in Kenya -
Kenya is today a major world producer of
tea it was brought there in 1903 back in
the British colonial days in Kenya they
brought tea to a lot of places the
stories are well known about the virtual
enslavement of millions who toiled on
the mountain sides working on the tea
plantations this was the dirty seme
underside of the tea growing industry
this aspect was no less odious than the
chapter on opium it's a very well
documented side of the history of tea by
the mid to late eighteen hundreds tea
had become a mature and established
global enterprise with major exchanges
and several cities to buy and sell tea
up until fortunes time tea had always
been sort of a mom and pop industry
despite the huge volumes of exports
beginning in the 1800s
of course nowadays in China you have
massive modern tea operations that
manufacture bulk commodity great teas
using all the latest machinery but the
quality remains in the artisanal tea
trade you'll see in all the web dealers
of tea and in serious tea shops all the
action is with quality loose leaf tea
that is still being made in China the
old-fashioned way
as expected China later on gotten to the
poppy growing an opium manufacturing
business that had an immediate effect on
British opium exports the EIC sent
fortune again as their agent to go check
out the operation and procure samples of
the china poppies for analysis and after
this consulting gig fortune was retained
by the USG to assist them and building a
tea operation in the southern united
states this involved another china trip
were fortunate to bring back some more
seeds this whole trick had been
thoroughly learned and perfected by this
time between March and August 1858
fortune did this work for the
maricon skis but when he brought
everything back his employers gave him
his walking papers and said they take
everything from there according to what
I read fortune ended up getting stiffed
by the Yanks and they never paid him in
in the end all the hard work came to
naught because when the u.s. Civil War
began a few years later in 1861 it
wasn't the best time to be setting up a
tea plantation in the south
Robert fortune made one last China trip
in 1862 this one was as a private
citizen he also visited Japan and in
both places brought back the usual array
of plant specimens and curiosities he
died in 1880 leaving in a state worth
40,000 pounds which in today's inflated
world would come to about 5 million
dollars Robert fortune gets credit for
more than acting as the tip of the spare
and bringing Chinese tea plants and
know-how to India he was the first to
successfully bring hundreds of species
of plants to England among them bleeding
hearts winter Jasmine white wisteria 12
species of rhododendron and the
chrysanthemum not too many people could
say they proved the great carl linnaeus
wrong but fortune did when he discovered
green and black tea both came from a
single species and had it not been for
fortune observing all the poisonous
additives being mixed in with the green
tea supply from China who knows how many
lives would have been lost anyway once
again the book is for all the tea in
China
how England stole the world's favorite
drink and changed history that's by
Sarah Rose and it's published by Penguin
Books in the late 1800s after tea
plantations sprouted up all over
northern India and Sri Lanka tea
planting then spread fast Russia Turkey
Africa and other parts of Asia after the
secret was out almost any country with
the climate and geography entered the
tea growing business after all this was
as I said in the first episode the third
most consumed substance on Earth after
air and water but its penetration to
almost every country on earth
only happened in the 20th century the
history of tea certainly is a long one
and it's intricately meshed with the
history and culture of China whether
this bond actually began in 27:37 BCE
was unknown who's to say for sure all we
can be assured of is that the original
tea garden that grew naturally long
before the development of Neolithic
civilizations were located in southwest
China and around the Golden Triangle
stretching to the Brahmaputra Valley of
India we know for certain that's where
it all began
the history is longer and older than
many of the oldest tea trees that still
stand today tea trees that are a
thousand two thousand and even 3,000
years old are still growing wild
offering silent testament to their long
existence who knows how many thousands
of years passed before mankind
discovered the merits of this leaf we
can marvel at how the Chinese were the
first to discover tea and how to heat it
pound it bake it roll it smoke it dry it
and do whatever it was to create a
beverage that would in time meet with
almost universal acceptance and every
civilization who came in contact with it
tea culture didn't happen just in China
wherever tea went the people of those
lands would enjoy and appreciate what
they could from China and then they
would swaddle this tea with their own
culture and add their unique touch this
happened wherever tea went even though
I've been rambling on for nine episodes
about tea the truth is I barely
scratched the surface of this subject
what tea means in China isn't
necessarily what a tea means in Turkey
every place has their own unique ways to
enjoy it and each place has their
preferred tastes if you're interested at
all there's really a whole world to
enjoy for all of you who perhaps haven't
tried tea beyond Lipton or Tetley tea
bag I hope this series has inspired you
to maybe go beyond this and say
while some of the delights of artisanal
loose leaf tea yeah it takes a little
more time to prepare but anyone will
tell you there's a world of difference